# Maybe Swap

A DEX that allows users to maybify their swaps. By maybifying their swaps, user's input tokens are converted to MAYBE token and get burnt to register a maybify. If user loses the maybify, they will not receive their swap output tokens. But if they win, they will get more of the swap output tokens than if they have not maybified their swap. This happens because winning a maybify triggers a mint of MAYBE tokens that are more than the burnt amount and these MAYBE tokens are swapped to user's desired output token.

## Integration of Unichain Hook Ideas

- Tokenized Strategies/Yield-Bearing Tokens: AMM liquidity is being used as the bankroll for the swaps. Because of the protocol fee, some percentage of the swap gets burnt and some percentage of that burnt amount gets minted for liquidity providers, on top the swap fees they get. In total, MAYBE tokens is expected to be deflationary. Generating a unique source of yield for not only liquidity providers for ETH/MAYBE pool by minting MAYBE exclusive for them but also to the holders of MAYBE token with deflation.

- Chain-Localized Routing: With the help of our MaybeZQuoter and MaybeZRouter contracts, we are able to find the best route for our trades on that chain, using only smart contracts calls. These contract aggregate multiple Uniswap protocols, with considering multi hop swaps, splitting swaps and more.

Current design works by making use of UniswapV4 Hooks and during the afterSwap() call, our MaybeHook is designed only to work for MAYBE/ETH pool (this is done to decrease liquidity fragmentation and will be discussed further). It is filtering the case where user is getting MAYBE tokens and burning those tokens to register a maybification with the extra info supplied via hookData. This does trigger a request for randomness, randomess will be resolved by calling the MaybeHook and it will decide if user has won or lost, mint the MAYBE tokens if user has won and swap back those MAYBE tokens to user's desired output token via the swapBackParams provided by the user at the time of registering a bet. Therefore, swapping back params might be stale so they have some chance to fail and in that case, rather than returning desired output token. MaybeHook tries to swap back to ETH if desired, and if that fails or user does not want to swap back to ETH, newly minted MAYBE tokens are sent to the user.

At the end of the day, we have to use our MAYBE/ETH V4 hooked pool specifically for the whole amount of the swap which is a weird request if you consider general quoting to get the best amount. Like given user's input token (lets call it token X) is WBTC and user's desired output token (lets call it token Y) is UNI. Normal DEXs would get a quote to swap token X to token Y with no extra conditions other than maximizin token Y amount received. Well, we have extra conditions, like we first have to swap token X to MAYBE and then in future have to swap MAYBE to token Y. So, cant we just get two quotes? One for swapping from token X to MAYBE and another for swapping MAYBE to token Y? Well yes, but not directly. To trigger a swap we have to make use of our MaybeHook which is making use of hookData to register the desired maybify. Problem is, the quoters could potentialy split the swap (like 25% of swap input going through WBTC => DAI => ETH => MAYBE and 75% WBTC => USDC => MAYBE) and cause to trigger multiple maybifys instead of one, or even worse maybe zero maybifys because, what happens when someone buys MAYBE token, creates a new UniswapV3 pool or V4 pool with no hook giving the user a better swap rate? Well, in that case the swap will not go through our V4 hooked pool and will not register a maybify. There is even a one step deeper problem, which is most of the quoters are not considerng V4 pool with hooks when quoting. As a result, our MAYBE/ETH pool with hook is omitted. For example, when calling the buildBestSwap via MaybeZQuoter (we will be explaining what this is in near future). So, we cant really get a quote for WBTC to MAYBE, as we are assuming we have to use MAYBE/ETH pool with our hook.

As a result, we ended up separating the problem one more time. How about we force the MAYBE/ETH pool with hook usage to be included in our smart contracts via a Router contract (MaybeRouter) rather than quoting all the way? So, rather than swapping all the way through from token X to MAYBE, we will get a quote for swapping from token X to ETH and we will perform that swap and include an action to swap from ETH to MAYBE to trigger a maybify? Well, that is exactly what we are doing using MaybeRouter, this contract expects to receive calls encoded by MaybeZQuoter for swapping user's input token to ETH, executed by calling MaybeZRouter. As a result, our frontend will be getting a quote for token X => ETH encode this for calling MaybeRouter with extra params related to swapping and registering a maybify from ETH => MAYBE.

Above design allowed us to resolve the first problem of going from user's desired token to MAYBE (WBTC => MAYBE) but we still need to resolve going from newly minted MAYBEs to user's desired output token (MAYBE => UNI). In this case, you might think since we are not forced to use our V4 hooked pool, we can just get quote for swapping from MAYBE to user's desired output token. Well, I wish that was the case but remember that quoting is omitting our Uniswap V4 hooked pool no matter if its triggering the afterSwap or not. Therefore, requesting such a quote would omit our V4 pool and would probably end up with a worse price for swapping MAYBE out to some other token, if some liquidity pool exists outside of our Uniswap V4 hooked pool (we assume that almost all of the liquidity for MAYBE will be inside this pool rather than some UniV4 pool with no hook or UniV3 therefore, when trying to get a better price for user, we are making use of that assumption). So, what we will be doing is, forcing the user to swap out of MAYBE to ETH using our V4 hooked pool by default and then assume that user will be swapping ETH back to their desired output token. Therefore, we will not be getting a quote from MAYBE to user's desired output token, rather we will be quoting from ETH to user's desired output token.

Lets analyse why we have choosen to focus all the liquidity in a single ETH/MAYBE pool. Swapping from user's input token (token X) to MAYBE and swapping out from MAYBE to user's desired output token (token Y) was an interesting problem. First thing that came to your mind might be having multiple pools of MAYBE agains a lot of different tokens like MAYBE/USDC, MAYBE/WBTC, MAYBE/ETH... but this is not really practical. This would fragment the available MAYBE liquidity to a lot of pools with no potential upside. As a result, we decided to use a single pool as the gateway to MaybeSwap and that pool is MAYBE/ETH. Almost all the liquidity is expected to deployed to this pool and as long as user is able to swap to ETH, they can swap to MAYBE. So, now our problem is, swapping from user's desired input to ETH and then swapping from ETH to user's desired output token. So far, we have just mentioned that we are getting a quote to swap token X to ETH and getting another quote to swap ETH to token Y. But we have went over the details to explain the high level overview. Now, lets get into the nitty gritties of quoting and swapping. We gotta do this in an efficient way to give great price rates to the user. What we gotta do is, build a DEX aggregation layer to be able to find great prices and execute those swaps. This would generally require some quoting API or some kind of a complex backend logic of ours. Which we wanted to avoid, first of all, relying on some quoting API is such a high risk, we dont really know whats going inside that API or even worse some of them (like 1inch) require KYC to use them. Also, its really hard to integrate them to the development cycle when you are deploying and testing locally or on testnet, so we wanted to avoid those to improve our development rate. When it comes to coming up with our own complicated backend logic to find the best quote, we wanted to avoid such a project because not only is it a huge task but also when we do so, users would have to rely on our backend code as well, which is not really a win over other APIs. Thankfully, we have find [@z0r0zzz](https://x.com/z0r0zzz)'s [zFi](https://github.com/z-fi/zFi) project, which has on chain quoting and routing using [zQuoter](https://github.com/z-fi/zFi/blob/main/src/zQuoter.sol) and [zRouter](https://github.com/z-fi/zFi/blob/main/src/zRouter.sol) contracts. Therefore, not only we can verify but also anyone can verify how the quoting/routing works. Even more importantly its permisionless like no service can go down that would effect our project. Also we can update the contract to our own needs. We spent quite some time to get familiar with these contract and ended up integrating them to our stack with some updates. You can check the high level overview from [here](https://zfi.wei.is/api/) as well. Those contracts were written for Ethereum mainnet yet we wanted to deploy on Base mainnet so we have done changes for that and they also had a lot of protocols integrated like Curve, Lido, SushiSwap... yet we are not feeling confident to integrating those protocols so we trimmed down the contract to exclude some. We named our version of zQuoter to be MaybeZQuoter and our version of zRouter to be MaybeZRouter. We had some other changes to the contracts based on our needs that will be explaining in future.

Now, back to swapping (back). There comes another problem tho, we have to input the swapBackParams with the first tx, which is swapping from user's desired input to MAYBE tokens and this swapBackParams will be used in future with some potential new prices and yet even worse, we are not even sure about the exact output of MAYBE we will be receiving, because of potential slippage and VRF fee (we will be discussing this further). This MAYBE will be burnt and potenatially we will mint some new MAYBE tokens based on that value so we can derive the minted MAYBE given burnt MAYBE but then we would have to swap newly minted MAYBE to ETH and there comes another uncertainty. As a result, we are trying to get a quote for an amount of ETH tokens that we are not sure to be swapped for. Also, we are not even sure about the MAYBE tokens that will be minted, which again we will not know the amount of and we are trying to optimize the output of user's desired tokens given these condition. Well, its not the easiest problem and requires us to do some tricky things.

First of all, what we are going to do is, calculate the minimum MAYBE amount that will be outputted given the initial swap (swap from user's desired input to MAYBE). User will be doing an exact in swap with some slippage therefore, we can at least calculate the minimum amount of MAYBE the bet will be for and deduct some MAYBE amount based on our VRF fee estimates as well. We will start by assuming this (as this is the least amount of MAYBE the user is swapping for) and calculate the amount of MAYBE tokens that will be minted if user wins, so if its a bet with 50% and 1% edge, x1.98 of initial burnt MAYBE will be minted. Since we know the minimal outputted MAYBE, we can calculate the minimum minted MAYBE. Since we know the minimum amount of MAYBE that will potentialy be minted, we can assume swap from MAYBE to ETH using that MAYBE amount and we can get a quote using that ETH value (in reality, user might receive more ETH and we assume that this slippage difference amount of ETH will not change the best exectuion path for quoted output since we assume this change in amount is not that significant). But it gets problematic because, if we get a quote using that exact in amount, the zQuoter will give us encoded calldatas for specifically swapping that amount using zRouter. Which is not ideal as, if the MAYBE received from the initial swap is more than the lower limit, we would not be making use of these extra ETH tokens when swapping back therefore, there would be ETH tokens accumulating in our hook, which is an inefficiency for the user that we want to avoid. So, we had to dive deeper into zRouter and zQuoter to allow us to encode calladata to swap the whole.

What we ended up doing is, added the param of `omitSwapAmountForBuildingCalldata` in our MaybeZQuoter contract, to allow users to call with `omitSwapAmountForBuildingCalldata` param which basically gets the best quote using the swapAmount given, yet when it comes to building calldata using the quote via `_buildSwapFromQuote` if `omitSwapAmountForBuildingCalldata` is true, swapAmount passed for calldata is encoded as 0. You might be confused as why encode the swapAmount to be 0, well logic behind that lies within zRouter (https://github.com/z-fi/zFi/blob/main/src/zRouter.sol). MaybeZRouter checks if it gets called with swapAmount == 0 and if thats the case, it makes use of the `_useTransientBalance()` to calculate the swapAmount and you can use `deposit()` function to deposit (or if its ETH, we can just send it via msgValue) some token to zRouter for it to be used for swaps. As a result, inside MaybeHook's swapping back logic, we will be swapping all the MAYBE tokens minted to ETH and we will be depositing all the ETH tokens to zRouter for it to be used for swaps. Since encode calldata from MaybeZQuoter is setting swapAmount to be 0, MaybeZRouter will be swapping using the ETH amount we have deposited. As a result, we have succesfully made use of all the ETH amount during swapping back and there will be no extra ETH accumulating in our hook contract. One catch tho, zQuoter and zRouter does support splitting the swap into different paths like swapping 75% of the input for some path and remaining 25% for another path. When swapping back, we gotta avoid those splits, as both swaps for the split will use swapAmount to be 0 and trying ton consume all the tokens rather than actually trying with some percentage of the swap. As a result, on frontend, when getting quotes for swapping back, we are avoiding quotes that split the swap.

Well, there is one more detail we have skipped so far, we assumed that there were no VRF fees for the randomness. Yet in reality, we have implemented Chainlink's VRF v2.5 method with direct funding method to allow users to pay for the VRF fees via ETH at request time. As a result, users have to pay for VRF when maybifying with ETH. Well how can we do that? We are assuming WBTC (or any input token X) will be swapped to ETH and then this ETH will be used to swap to MAYBE and cause a trigger to maybification. Well, how about, we just decrease the amount of ETH we swap for the bet? Well, that's a great fit for beforeSwap(). So, when user is swapping ETH to MAYBE using our hook with hookData. We will calculate the VRF fee in ETH and will just consume that ETH before swap happens. Therefore, only the remaining ETH gets swaped to MAYBE. So, after all, the WBTC gets swapped for ETH, our MaybeRouter is holding those ETHs, then MaybeRouter swaps ETH for MAYBE, MaybeHook calculates the VRF fee and decreases the ETH swapped amount and takes the VRF fee to itself. Then ETH gets swapped to MAYBE and inside after swap those MAYBEs get burnt to register a maybification and VRF requested inside the afterSwap() and since MaybeHook claimed some ETH inside beforeSwap() it was able to pay for VRF fees.

This causes another problem tho, which is related to swapBackParams, we had a way to calculate the expected MAYBE amount as we were not sure about the exact MAYBE amount we would have. Payment of VRF fee adds another layer of complexity to this as we now have to incooparate this detail to the expected MAYBE amount. So, we are doing that in the tests and you can check it. Basically, while building the swapBackParams, we are calling to get the estimated VRF fee in ETH and decreasing our ETH output by that amount which effects our expected MAYBE amount. Well, that complexity is only related to frontend and we have implemented those details.

Technical entry points:

- MaybeHook.\_maybify() function allows any user that is swapping from ETH to MAYBE (using this pool) to maybify their swap and when it gets resolved MAYBE tokens get minted, user might directly receive MAYBE or swap MAYBE to ETH using this same pool. Afterwards, using swapBackParams they can swap those ETH tokens to token Y. As a result, allowing swapping from ETH to token Y (in the middle they get swapped to MAYBE and it gets burnt and minted)
- MaybeRouter.maybeSwap() function allows any user to extend the ability of MaybeHook.\_maybify() by allowing user to batch the action of swapping token X to token ETH beforehand. Since MaybeHook.\_maybify() allows user to swap from ETH to token Y (with MAYBE in middle), with MaybeRouter.maybeSwap() user is able to swap from token X to token Y (using ETH and MAYBE in the middle)
- MaybeHook.maybify() function allows any user that is swapping from MAYBE to token Y to maybify their swaps. As MaybeHook.\_maybify() function was assuming a swap from ETH to MAYBE, user had to start by swapping to ETH to initiate a maybification. Yet, if user wants to start the swap from MAYBE, they would have to swap from MAYBE to ETH and then maybify their swaps from ETH which was wasteful. So, we decided to expose a function to allow maybifying user's swap from MAYBE to token Y (there is no need to swap from MAYBE to ETH to register a maybification). What this means is that, now MaybeRouter.maybeSwap() (or some newly introduced function) can technicaly allow user to swap from token X to MAYBE and then call MaybeHook.maybify() instead of swapping from ETH to MAYBE.

Lets get to incentives and tokenomics to check if we were able to create a healthy ecosystem. There are 3 main actors for the protocol and they should have incentivizes to use the protocol to create a sustainable ecosystem. First of them is the user, protocol should provide a great feature for users to want to interact with. We have created this maybification of swaps and we assume that given current output rates, there is interest of maybifying swaps from the users. Second actor is the protocol (can be also called holders of MAYBE), protocol should be gaining something from the activity of this swaps to be incentivized to increase the volume and we have successfully integrated an incentive there by introducing protocol fee to the MaybeHook (decreases the incentive of the user by decreasing their output, but we assume that users are still incentivized even after this). With this introduction, every 1% of the swaps are expected to be net burned and MAYBE to be deflationary as a result. Therefore, benefiting protocol and holders of MAYBE in the long run. Third and last actor is the liquidity providers for this pool, as newly minted MAYBE tokens get swapped back to ETH using this pool, if there is no ETH in this pool there is nothing to swap back to. So, we have to have some incentivizes for liquidity providers to keep this ecosystem sustainable and this is the last tricky part. Well, what we have ended up doing is, sharing some part of the protocol fee with liquidity providers. Protocol fee decreases the MAYBE minted and as a result decreases expected minted MAYBE amount for a maybification and causes the MAYBE to be deflationary, we ended up minting some of these expected burns to the liquidity providers. Now, all 3 actors have an incentive to participate in the ecosystem. Right now, we are considering setting protocol fee to be 1% and setting lp fee share to be 50% so whenever a swap happens 1% (protocol fee) \* 50% (lp share of the fee) => 0.5% of MAYBE will be minted as reward to liquidity providers and the remaining 0.5% is expected to be burnt and cause MAYBE to be deflationary. You might think that liquidity providers were already incentivized because of the pool fees, yet we are expecting this MaybeHook to be used with small fees to provide great exchange rates for the swap, as this fee will be paid once at registering and once at resolvement and these do add up. So, we want to decrease the fee value to have efficient swaps as if MAYBE was not in the middle. As a result, liquidity providers lacked incentive and we had to resolve it

## NOTICE

This project is being built heavily on top of [@z0r0zzz](https://x.com/z0r0zzz)'s [zFi](https://github.com/z-fi/zFi) project which includes zRouter and zQuoter that allows a simple frontend to have DEX aggreation on chain without the need for a backend. This helps tremendously when trying to quickly develop and test our smart contracts because we can easily fork the mainnet and get quotes and swapping tested with our in development code. In addition, they have a public [frontend](https://github.com/z-fi/zFi/tree/main/dapp) that interacts with these contracts and is published on IPFS that we got inspired from and after updating it based on our needs, we decided to follow their way and deployed our frontend to IPFS and make use of their WEI name services to host this IPFS at https://maybeswap.wei.domains. So, we want to thank [@z0r0z](https://github.com/z0r0z) for their public work.
